<!--
Title: If-Let Assignment Operator
Description: A custom operator you will want to use
Date: 2015/10/29
Template: post
Blog: true
-->

How many times have you had to implement this pattern?

<pre><code class="language-swift">
if let value = someOptionalValue as? String {
    self.value = value
}
</code></pre>

I use this all the time when parsing through JSON or implementing
NSCoding and I think its a little over verbose for Swift, I felt sure
there was a better way. [NSHipster][1] mentions a logical OR assignment
operator (||=) which would be perfect however, it doesn't seem to be
implemented for generics *(Please let me know if I am wrong here)*. I
thought I would give it a try...

<pre><code class="language-swift">
infix operator ||= { associativity right precedence 90 }

func ||= (inout left: T, right: T?) {
    if let right = right {
        left = right
    }
}
</code></pre>

It actually worked quite well, I was able to reduce the original code to
this

<pre><code class="language-swift">
self.value ||= someOptionalValue as? String
</code></pre>

Might not be the biggest win, but when you have several of these
assignments in a row, it saves a lot of code and makes it much more
readable. One more thing... and I am still trying to figure out exactly
what is going on here, but I ended up having to define a second function
to assign to optionals. The only difference is the left parameter now is
T?

<pre><code class="language-swift">
func ||= (inout left: T?, right: T?) { // The left param is now Optional
    if let right = right {
        left = right
    }
}

var someOptionalString: String?

someOptionalString ||= newValue // Will assign when newValue is not optional
</code></pre>

If you are interested in seeing this in action, here is the [Playground][2]
>  This was tested on Swift 2.0

**UPDATE 11/01/2015:** I was
notified by twitter that ||= is equal to left = left || right in ruby
and what I am trying to do is left = right || left. I was not aware of
this usage, to avoid confusion, I would  probably use another operator
?=.

<pre><code class="language-swift">
infix operator ?= { associativity right precedence 90 }

func ?=<T>(inout left: T, right: T?) {
    if let value = right {
        left = value
    }
}

func ?=<T>(inout left: T?, right: T?) {
    if let value = right {
        left = value
    }
}
</code></pre>

[1]: http://nshipster.com/swift-operators/
[2]: content/downloads/if-let-operator.playground.zip