<!--
Title: Easy, Automatic Server Mocking for iOS Testing
Description: iOS Server Mocking using mitmproxy.
Date: 2016/06/27
Template: post
Blog: true
-->

> What do you do when you need to run UI tests on an integration server
> for an app that requires a VPN to reach its web service?

This was a question that I needed an answer for earlier this week. My
first thought was to try to stub out the service calls with dummy data
and bundle it with my app, but this was going to need a lot of work to
maintain and I am pretty lazy. After an hour or so of research, I came
upon (link: https://mitmproxy.org text: mitmproxy). Here is the solution...

Project Configuration
---------------------

First set up a new project configuration and call it something like
"Mock" In your app's target build settings, find the section called
"Other Swift Flags". Twirl down the arrow and add "-D MOCKING" next to
your mocking configuration. This works similarly to preprocessor macros
in Objective-C, and will allow you to set up code that will only be
compiled when it is defined. Hopefully you are using NSURLSession for
your API calls, find the place where you initialize it and set its
configuration like this.

code=swift
let config = NSURLSessionConfiguration.defaultSessionConfiguration()

#if MOCKING
let proxyDict = [
    "HTTPSEnable":NSNumber(integer: 1),
    "HTTPSProxy":String("localhost"),
    "HTTPSPort":NSNumber(integer: 8080),
    "HTTPEnable":NSNumber(integer: 1),
    "HTTPProxy":String("localhost"),
    "HTTPPort":NSNumber(integer: 8080)
]
config.connectionProxyDictionary = proxyDict
#endif

NSURLSession(configuration: config)
==!

This will redirect your http and https requests made with that session
through your local proxy.

Install and Configure mitmproxy
-------------------------------

Now you are ready to install mitmproxy. "brew install mitmproxy". After
installing, run it once from the terminal to make sure everything works.
This will also install a certificate into \~/.mitmproxy. Clone [this
repository](https://github.com/ADVTOOLS/ADVTrustStore.git) somewhere.
This tool will install the certificate into your simulators. Run this
command:

code=bash
./iosCertTrustManager.py -a ~/.mitmproxy/mitmproxy-ca-cert.pem
==!

You will have to enter "y" for any of the simulators you want to use.
Now comes the moment of truth. Run mitmproxy again and start-up your
app. Requests should appear in the window.

(image: /content/images/Screenshot-2016-06-24-20.25.03.png class: centerimage)

SUCCESS!!!

Start Recording
---------------

Finally we can start recording, when you are ready, run this command.

    mitmdump -w <output file name>

You can name the output file whatever you want. Once it is running, do
any actions you want to record in the Simulator, and they will be saved
to that file.

(image: content/images/Screenshot-2016-06-24-20.26.41.png class: centerimage)

Press CTRL+C when you are done. Now when you want to replay the
responses you saved, run this command.

code=bash
mitmdump -S <saved file>
==!

If your server is uses https, you can prevent mitmdump from trying to
check the certificates during replay by adding the option
"--no-upstream-cert". You will now be able to run your app, even if you
have no internet connection. This works especially well for UI testing
since your requests are not likely to differ between runs. ...and that's
it. I hope you find this useful, and if you have any questions, feel
free to poke me on [twitter](https://twitter.com/@westonhanners).
